---
layout: notapost
title: "Conditionals & Loops"
---

### Boolean Operators

The operator `==` will tell you if two things are equal.
Note that one equal sign `=` means "assignment" and two equals signs `==` means "test equal."
If `x` and `y` are equal, `x == y` will turn into `True`.
If `x` and `y` are not equal, `x == y` will turn into `False`.

For example,
```
print(11 == 11)
print("hello" == "hello")
```

`<` will tell you if the left thing is smaller than the right thing.

`>` will tell you if the left thing is bigger than the right thing.

`<=` and `>=` will do exactly what you expect.

**Challenges:**
* Which of the following three are equal to `1111`?
  * `10 * 111`,
  * `57 * 33`, or
  * `11 * 101`

* Which is bigger, `123 * 45` or `8765`?

* How do you test whether a user said "yes" in their `input`?

### `if`, `elif`, and `else`

Conditional statements (syntax: `if`) allow your code to make decisions based on input.
Code inside an `if` block is only executed if the test next to the `if` evaluates to `True`.
*Note how whitespace at the beginning of a line determines which block a line of code is in.*

```python
print("duu du duu du dududu...")
print("duu du duu du dududu...")
if input("Is there something strange in your neighborhood? ") == "yes":
  print("who ya gonna call??? ghostbusters!!")
```

The syntax `elif` (else if) allows you to perform a subsequent test if the first `if` doesn't evaluate to `True`.
The syntax `else` is a catch-all that executes at the end of a series of `if` and `elif` tests if nothing else has triggered.

```python
print("duu du duu du dududu...")
print("duu du duu du dududu...")
if input("Is there something strange in your neighborhood? ") == "yes":
  print("who ya gonna call??? ghostbusters!!")
elif input("An invisible man... sleepin in your bed? ") == "yes":
  print("who ya gonna call??? ghostbusters!!")
elif input("Mm.. if you've had a dose... of a freaky ghost baby? ") == "yes":
  print("who ya gonna call??? ghostbusters!!")
else:
  print("you better NOT call... ghostbusters!")
```

**Challenge:**
Ghostbusters is a PG-13 movie.
Ask the user for their age and then tell them if they're ready to see Ghostbusters.
If they're younger than thirteen, tell them no!
Else, if they're older than 113, tell them that they're the oldest person in the world.
Otherwise, tell them they're cleared to watch Ghostbusters.
_Hint_: `input` returns a string, but you're probably against 13 and 113, which are numbers! 

### `while` and `break`

According to urban legend, saying "bloody mary" 13x into a mirror will summon a scary ghost.
Here's one way of doing that.

```python
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
print("Bloody Mary!")
```

Pretty annoying, right?
The syntax `while` repeats a block of code until the test next to it evaluates `False`.

```python
while input("Keep going?") == "yes":
  print("Bloody Mary!")
```

We can make Python count to 13 for us.
The variable `i` increases by one until it reaches 13.

```python
i = 0
while i < 13:
  print("Bloody Mary!", i)
  i = i + 1
```

What if we want a way to back out of summoning the scary mirror ghost?
Python's `break` statement allows the programmer to end a loop.
Let's put a `break` statement inside an `if` to stop the summoning if we get scared.

```python
i = 0
while i < 13:
  print("Bloody Mary!", i)
  i = i + 1
  if input("Scared yet??? ") == "yes":
    print("ok let's stop")
    break
```

### `for` and `range`

Programmers want to execute a code block `n` times so often that Python gives us a way to do just that: a `for` loop coupled with the function `range(0,n)`.
Like so,

```python
for i in range(0,13):
  print("Bloody Mary!", i)
```

Conceptually, `for` iterates over each element `in` a collection --- it puts each element in the collection one at a time into the variable `i`.
The function `range(0,n-1)` creates a collection with the numbers `0` through `n-1`.
(This way, when code inside `for i in range(n):` runs `n` times.)
If we wanted the numbers 1 through 13 instead of 0 through 12, we would write `range(1,14)`. 

**Comprehension Question:**
How many times will "Boo!" get printed?

```python
for i in range(3):
  for j in range(3):
    print("Boo!")
```

**Challenge:**
There's one ghost in the first room.
There's two ghosts in the second room.
There's three ghosts in the third room... and so on and so forth.
There's thirteen rooms in this haunted 80's penthouse.
Can you use math and a loop to calculate how many ghosts we're going to run into total?

### Number Guessing Game

Let's put it all together to make a number guessing game.
Python will randomly choose a number and then we'll make successive guesses until we get it.
Each time we guess, Python will tell us if our guess was too low or too high.

#### Number guessing game solution

{% include codeinclude.html file='num_guess_game.py' %}

### Rock paper scissors

**Extra Challenge:**
Can you write a program that lets two players play Rock, Paper, Scissors against eachother?
Your program should request player 1 and player 2's choices (rock, paper, or scissors), and determine whether player 1 wins, player 2 wins, or the two players tied.

#### Rock paper scissors solution

{% include codeinclude.html file='rock_paper_scissors.py' %}

