---
layout: notapost
title: "Data Structures"
---

### Lists

We can compose simple data types (e.g., strings, integers, etc) into more complex data structures.

A list, for example, lets us store a sequence of values (often referred to as elements):

```python
pet_names = ['Yogi', 'Boomer', 'Gunther', 'Banana']
```

You can access and reassign individual positions (or indexes) in a list using square brackets `[]`. NOTE: lists in python always start at 0 (e.g., 'Yogi' in our example is at position 0 of the `pet_names` list).

```python
print(pet_names[0]) # will print Yogi
print(pet_names[1]) # will print Boomer
print(pet_names[3]) # will print Banana

# We can access a list with negative numbers, too...
print(pet_names[-1]) # will print Banana
```

**CHALLENGE QUESTION**: how might we get the second-to-last value in the list?

We can modify the value of something in the list:

```python
pet_names[1] = "BOOMER"
print(pet_names[1]) # will print BOOMER
```

A word of warning: if you try to index into a position beyond the size of the list, python will yell at you: `IndexError: list index out of range`.

```python
pet_names[4] # will give you an error
pet_names[100] # will give you an error
pet_names[-4] # will give you an error
```

We can loop over a list using a for loop:

```python
for name in pet_names:
    print(name)
```

It's often useful to check to see if a particular value is in the list:

```python
print("'Alex' in the list? " + str('Alex' in pet_names))         # no
print("'Yogi' in the list? " + str('Yogi' in pet_names))         # yes
print("'BANANA' in the list? " + str('BANANA' in pet_names))     # nope - remember, python is case sensitive
print("'gunther' in the list? " + str('gunther' in pet_names))   # nope
```

We can append things to the end of lists:

```python
pet_names.append("Doggo")
# We can print the entire list
print(pet_names)
```

We can insert things into the list at a particular position:

```python
pet_names.insert(1, "Fishy")
print(pet_names)
```

We can remove a particular value from the list:

```python
pet_names.remove("Gunther")
print(pet_names)
```

We can remove something from the list by position:

```python
pet_names.pop(1)
print(pet_names)
```

Wait, how long is our list? We can use the `len()` instruction to check:

```python
list_len = len(pet_names)
print(list_len)
# We could also:
print(len(list_len))
```

We can sort a list:

```python
sorted_pet_names = sorted(pet_names)
print(sorted_pet_names)

# What if we want reverse order?
reverse_sorted_pet_names = sorted(pet_names, reverse=True)
print(reverse_sorted_pet_names)
```

We can remove everything from a list:
```python
pet_names.clear()
print(pet_names)
```

For more things you can do with lists see: [https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#more-on-lists](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#more-on-lists)

**CHALLENGES**

- Make a list of 10 numbers (of your choosing)
  - calculate the average
  - get the difference between the max and the minimum value

### Dictionaries

We won't spend much time on dictionaries for the moment, but we'll point them out because they're super useful.

A dictionary (often refered to as a `dict`) in Python is a set of key-value pairs.

In Python, dictionaries are denoted using `{}`.

```python
info_dict = {"name": "Dumbledore", "age": 115}
```

In the above example, we created a dictionary with 2 entries with the following keys: `"name"`, `"age"`.

We access the values in a dictionary using their keys:

```python
print(info_dict["name"])                  # Dumbledore
print(info_dict["age"])                   # 115
```

We can update the value associated with a particular key:

```python
info_dict["name"] = "Harry Potter"
print(info_dict["name"])            # Harry Potter
```

We can add entries to a dictionary:

```python
info_dict["muggle"] = False
print(info_dict)
```

**CHALLENGE**: Entries in a dictionary can have different types, not just numbers and strings. 
Make a dictionary where at least one entry has a list for a value and another entry has a dictionary for a value.

For more on dictionaries: [https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries)


### Data structures - example games

#### World guessing game

In the word guessing game, the programmer has selected a secret word, and the player has 10 rounds to guess reveal what the secret is by guessing one letter at a time.

#### Simon Says

Game description:

Simon says is played in rounds. Starting the game with and empty list, the program selects a random letter each round. The program prints the chosen letter for the player to see. The player must then input each letter that the program previously output. Any deviation from the correct sequence results in a loss. The player's goal is to achieve as high a score as possible.


Example gameplay:

```
Simon says:  B
> B
Simon says: C
> B
> C
Simon says: A
> B
> C
> A
Simon says: C
> B
> C
> A
> C
Simon says: D
> C
WRONG! Final score = 4
```

In the above example, the program output all of the 'simon says' lines (using `print("Simon says:", letter)`), and player input (using `input(">")`) is given after the '>' prompt. When the player fails to repeat the full sequence, the player loses, and the game reports their final score.

If you have extra time, you can consider making the following changes:

- Ensure that the user is only allowed to select a valid option (prompting them again if necessary)
- Change the elements that are being tested to (‘Rock’, ‘Paper’, or ‘Scissors’)
- For each input, let the player know how many more letters they need to provide for the round.
- Be sure to partition your code into functions with clear names and documentation
